Welcome everybody, my name is Hannes Jöhnila, I've worked with OpenTree Planner, which
is an open source journey planner, quite similar to the MOTUS project for almost 10 years now,
a bit on and off, so with other projects as well, and for one kind of different organizations,
both in Finland and now at the moment in Norway. But before we talk about the project itself,
I would like to say a couple of words about Entour. So I don't think Entour is as famous
company as some of the other ones that we have today, but it's actually, it used to
be a part of the Norwegian State Railway Company, and it was carved out when competition was
introduced in the Norwegian railway system. And nowadays it takes care of all ticketing,
all public transit timetable information in the whole country of Norway. And we use almost
exclusively open source software, at least in our team, which handles the incoming transit
data, all the journey planning, all the APIs that we provide for all of the railway companies,
all of the other hobbyists that want to have a journey planner API or like a screen at
their home, any kind of API we can provide that. And here in the middle is OpenTree Planner,
which is quite a key component. So first, I will talk a bit about the past.
So how did we come here? What was OpenTree Planner in the origin? How has it evolved
over the years? What were some pain points in the history? Then I will spend most of
the time with OpenTree Planner 2, which we released two years ago and have since continued
to develop. And finally, I will have a couple of minutes to discuss some topics that we
will be implementing in the future. But before I start, I'd like to see in the
audience how many of you have heard about the project before? Can I have some hands?
So about a half, I would say. How many of you have actually tested it yourself?
So almost as many, which is a good sign because I think it's very important for an open source
project that it's easy to get going with this. It's easy to take into use.
And yeah, as I mentioned already in the beginning, OpenTree Planner or OTP, as I will probably
reference it, is quite similar project to the MODIS project that we have had presenting.
So it's a passenger information system for transit data and other multimodal services.
And it handles journey planning, but it also has APIs for just querying the data.
So here we can see how the number of commits to the repository has been over the years.
So it started in 2009 in Portland, Oregon in the US. And they wanted to build a journey
planner that was open source. So they took in people that had been contributing
to other libraries or projects that involved journey planning, transit data, other kinds
of projects and took them into the room and said, OK, we'll give you money.
Just build us this software.
And then about a year later, it was put into production. And in 2013, the people involved
started a company called Conveil, which took over the maintenance.
But over the years, that company has actually gone more towards the direction of transit
analysis. So doing software for the different cities, the different transit authorities,
similar to what we actually have already seen today.
But in 2013, a really important step was taken. There was a big project with the Dutch government
for improving multimodal transit data and real time data.
But at the same time, there was a second project that was included in the bigger Dutch project
called R4, which was implementing the Raptor algorithm in a OpenS.
And then it was later rewritten in R5, which is a software by Conveil.
2016, there was new deployments in Washington, D.C., the New York State, Oslo, Helsinki,
so a bit all over the place. And there were some trials with nationwide scaling.
But then the project kind of stagnated until 2018, 2019, when N2R and R2R two Norwegian
companies took over the responsibility and ported over the Raptor algorithm from the
R5 project into OpenSri Planner. And then in 2020, we released the OpenSri Planner 2.
And here you can see if I overlay the commits for the R5 project, you can see that, well,
it was the project that took the focus in the meantime.
So what were the main pain points with OpenSri Planner 1? The core issue is the journey
planning algorithm that was selected. So there was a time dependent A-star search with trip
banning that used over the whole network. So both street network, transit network, the
multimodal stuff, everything was in the same algorithm. And how it worked is that you run
a search, then you get results, you ban all the trips that you were using, and then you
rerun. So it didn't scale that well when you wanted to have more results or a longer or
larger graph. And also it was more focused towards research capabilities. But these were
then later on taken over by R5. And we removed quite a lot of this from OpenSri Planner 2
focusing on the journey planning part. Also, there was a lack of kind of vision of where
it should go, how it should be structured, everything. And also there was development
happening in many different repositories, and it was not really well coordinated. So
for example, HSL, where the Digitransit project is, or who owns the Digitransit project, they
have their own fork of the project that has quite a lot of other development. But that
has now been mostly ported back to OpenSri Planner 2.
So let's take a quick look how it works. I think this is the main difference between
OTP1 and OTP2. In OTP1, as I said, all of the routing was done inside one single search.
In OTP2, we first get a request from the API. Then we run a street search. It's basically
an A-star search, but just with a single mode or with different modes if you want to have
rental bicycle, rental scooters, parking your car, or anything like that. Then we enrich
this with flexible transit results for the last and first mile. Then we do a transit
search using the Raptor algorithm. And finally, we have two post-processing steps that I will
talk a bit about later on. And then we send the result out in the API.
So the street search is actually pretty much the same as it was in OpenSri Planner 1. There
are some improvements. There are, for example, free-floating vehicles, new types of vehicles,
so scooters, real-time parking information so that if you do a park-and-ride search,
it will actually only be suggested to park at a place where we know that there probably
will be space. And also, there is improved focus on this kind of quality of the routing.
So there is a walk safety score so that we prefer, for example, walking through nice
gardens or other paths that are not next to a big motorway.
Yeah, so I mentioned flexible routes. So most of you would assume that this is, or think
about this when you think about transit timetables, so that you have a fixed set of stops, fixed
set of times. But there are many other ways that transit can be structured. So you can
have, for example, hail-and-ride sections where you actually don't have any stops, but you
can just flag the bus anywhere you want. Or you can have areas, just one, two, or as many
as you like. And the bus will deviate from its pre-assigned route and just drop you home
or pick you up from the door. Or it can be a group of stops, some kind of feeder services
that take you to the nearest railway station if there is no regular transit in the village.
Or it can be as complex services as we like with any kind of combination.
So after we have added the flex results, we do a Raptor search where we insert all the
street routing results, all the flexible results, and then we operate only on trips with fixed
schedules and fixed stops. So there is actually multiple levels of Raptor. So Raptor is an
algorithm that was introduced in 2012 by a researcher from Microsoft Research. And the
basic Raptor, it has two criteria. So it has arrival time, a number of transit, and it
departs at a fixed time. Basically what you do is that you find all of the stops that
you can walk to or make the street routing to. Then you board all the vehicles from those
stops, then you alight at every possible stop and find where you have arrived. Then you
find all of the transfers from those stops to all other stops, and then you continue
this in new rounds. So this finds your results with the two criteria, the one with the shortest
arrival time and the one with the least transfers. Then you can run this Range Raptor, which is
basically just running the Raptor algorithm, but you start at the minute and then you run
it backwards and adding new results to the beginning as you go. And then you get this
three criteria result that has the departure time, arrival time, and number of transfers.
And that creates this kind of set where you have the departure time, arrival time, number
of transfers are all optimal. Then you can insert one or more criteria, like we're talking
about that you want to optimize for CO2 usage or wheelchair accessibility or comfort that
you only want to use transit that is not too crowded, any kind of numerical value you can
add as a criteria, but that unfortunately has the downside that it quite heavily affects
the performance. Yeah, so this is basically how we do it. This is the result of the one
round of Raptor search. This is of the two, three, you only add a few other leaves and
then the last you just basically prune the result so that there is some where it's optimal
to actually not use a trip with just one transfer, but you need to transfer many, many times.
Then we do a process called transfer optimization. And this is especially in the railways where
you can transit transfer between two trips at multiple stations. And it's actually the
end result will be the same independently of where you transfer. You will get home at
the same time, but it might be nice to transfer somewhere where you have a roof over you,
or maybe you have if you have like one hour of time, you want to spend somewhere where
you have access to a cafe, or then you want to make sure that you have a high probability
of getting your transfers. So the one that is has the longest waiting time. And a specific
type is this kind of back travel that you want to avoid that if you go from the blue
dot to the red dot, you don't want to ride all over the last stop and then all the way
back because that is most probably quite expensive. Then we do itinerary filtering and decorating.
So the aim from the Raptor is to get as much results as possible. And then here we can
make more intricate comparison between different results. And we can prune results that might
be optimal, but are really bad compared to other ones. So for example, you might want
to have or you might have a result where you have just one track like no transfers, but
you are expected to walk 45 minutes. And that's not really you probably want to do if you
have a like possibility to do it to do it in 50 minutes less. Then a big thing in Open
Century Planner 2 was the inclusion of a separate data model. So prior in OTP1, the data model
was based on the GTFS vocabulary and all the data was imported as the GTFS objects. But
in OTP2, we have a internal data model that is built so that we can import transit data
from both NetX and GTFS. So it's independent of data source and we can easily add new data
sources. So there was, for example, a Swiss data set that somebody was looking at in importing
into Open Tree Planner. Then something that became really popular is the sandbox extensions.
So we introduced a mechanism for plugging in a optional plugin into Open Tree Planner
2 and this has been really successful with currently 22 different extensions existing.
So you can provide new APIs, new data formats, new functionality that you may be that is
maybe not ready to take into the core Open Tree Planner, but there's something that
is in the process of development. Or you might want to have some functionality that is custom
for your deployment, but you want to make sure that it keeps up to date and that it's
maintained and that if you do some changes in the data model or any code that we have,
we will keep those updated. So one extension is that we now have two GraphQL APIs, one
that is based on GTFS vocabulary and one that is based on trans model vocabulary. And you
can use import data, for example, in Skone in the south of Sweden. They import Swedish
timetables in NetX and Danish timetables that they use for trips to Copenhagen in GTFS.
And then you can use this unified API where you provide the data in standard format so
that if you want to have the results in GTFS vocabulary, you can get that, but you can
also get in trans model vocabulary if you want it. And also GraphQL is really useful
for this kind of journey planning purposes because usually you want to fetch little information
about very many objects. And if you have this traditional, very rest pure way, you end up
having like hundreds of queries that you need to do. But with GraphQL, you can fetch exactly
the things that you need and only those. And that also saves quite a lot of space for mobile
apps where you can limit the number of downloaded bytes.
Then we have vector tiles. So you can query all the geometric information that we have,
just spatial information. So all the stop stations, rental stations, even individual
rental vehicles, car and bike parking and so on. And you can add real time information
for those so that you can easily show them up where you have like the live availability
of all the rental systems.
And then one feature that actually we bought back from OTP2 was that that was removed as
a sandbox extension. And that is the travel time analysis. And this is a feature that
sits somewhere between pure journey planning and pure research applications, because this
is really useful for some applications where you, for example, you're looking to buy a
house and you can easily see, okay, like on the web page of the seller, they can show
like this map that, okay, this is the area where you actually can get into with public
transit in 15 minutes or by car in 15 minutes or by rental bikes in 15 minutes. So all of
this is multimodal and you can export both geojasons, so the borders of the areas, or
you can get a geotive with actual second values of how many seconds does it take to get to
this pixel on the map.
One other big improvement that we did with OTP2 is that we simplified the operations.
OTP1 expected that you always have a local file system and that you always have all the
files on the local file system. But we abstracted this into a data source that can be input or
can be output or can be both. And currently we have local file system, so you can still
have everything in the local file system if you wish. You can fetch files over HTTPS and
you can load and save data to all cloud storage services or at least all the major ones and
it's really easy to create your own if you want.
Yeah, also there is improved monitoring support so you can get all the timing data of the
internal algorithms really easily.
We improved quite a lot of the documentation, so you can find the link over there. And actually
with that new configuration structure, this is all that you need in order to fetch all
the data and build the graph for the entirety of the Belgian country.
So you have four different operators. You just say that these are the paths. You can
also say if you would have, for example, the German NetX feed you could have there as well
and multiple open street map files. And with different tag mapping, so different countries
have different rules and regulations of whether you are allowed, for example, to walk on a
bike path or if you are allowed to drive on the street if there is a bike path next to
it and so on. And that's why we have this customizable tag mapping so that each country
or even city can have their own rules about how these things should be mapped.
Yeah, then a bit about the future, what we are planning to do next. We, of course, continue
all the time with feature development. So we have built now during the winter via search
that was not part of the initial OTP to release so that you can say that, oh, I want to go
from here. I want to go to my hotel, but actually I want to visit this bar in the between. So
you can get all the connections that are from here to the bar. Then you say that, OK, I
want to spend about two hours in the bar and then you will get the results about two hours
later from the bar to your hotel. The second one is GBFS geofencing areas so that you can
limit where you can actually use your scooter. If there is some places where you don't if
you can't park it, you will be instructed to actually park it just before the zone starts.
Or if you have speed limits, it might be beneficial to drive around those speed limits. Then performance
is something that we think is very important. We have been focusing more and more of it
and we started actually measuring it. So we run a set of queries after each commit and
we store them in a Postgres database. And then we have a nice dashboard that's where
you can go to and see how we have been doing over time. And we have multiple data sets.
It's so that if somebody is using this in production, we can add their data set so that
they can see how their data set is performing because different data sets have quite different
performance characteristics because you might have a very large network or you might have
a network with very strange timing conditions or other things that might affect it.
Yeah, we are also working on new internal data model for the timetable data that is
better suited for Raptor that uses a virtual trip for heuristic calculations so that you
don't actually need to do any timetable lookups and it's better memory or it's more memory
efficient. So, for example, we noticed that, okay, most timetables actually only operate
on full minutes and are less than four hours and a quarter. So you can store them in just
one daytime and an array of bytes. Yeah. And then one thing that is actually touching,
there was a question about the international deployment. So we run currently in Norway,
we run a Nordic graph that contains data for all the Nordic countries, but we are working
on this kind of segmented or tiered model where we actually separate the transit networks
into local and long distance. And then we split those into smaller and we only take
in the routing data that you need for your search. Then there is this competition of
relatives in Norway. We have commercial bus operators and we have their data. And unfortunately,
they do some awful tricks. So, for example, they might schedule a trip that starts one
minute later than the competitors and arrives one minute earlier. And that way you actually
drop the other operator completely from the results. So what we are planning is to add
a Raptor criteria where we have a bit set of the commercial operators used and that
makes it so that we will always suggest all the available options, even though they are
not optimal, as long as they use a different carrier. And we are also planning for a unified
graphical API where we would have one data model, one structure, but two dialects, one
for GTFS and one for trans model in order to lower the overhead. So that was it. Thank
you very much.
I think we might have time for one, two questions. So if there is anybody in the audience. Yeah.
So we take the data from OpenStreetMap and some areas have it better, some have it worse.
We also use, if you have in your GTFS, we use this pathways extension so you can model
inside of the railway station and then we just link not the inwards of the railway station,
but the entrances and then the inner model comes from the pathways. There is also something
similar available in NetX, but that we don't import at the moment. Yeah.
Do you understand correctly that you have demand responsive transit also?
So that was the part about the flex search. That is the second part before the timetable.
So at the moment we only use it for first and last mile.
But you only interface with external APIs to do their calculations?
We don't do any availability. So we just say that it might be possible to take this, but
you need to plan. But that is something that you can implement in a filter so that the
filter actually does the query of, okay, is this possible? And then you can enhance the
result with that data. Yeah.
Very short question because there is no time. Yeah.
I have been trying to be short. So what's your international point of view with different
aspects of optimization, transport and speed of transport. With high speed train between
Brussels and Italy, you pay a lot. When you go with the train and with pedestrian, you
have the cheaper solution. And when it's a bicycle, it's an optimal solution for me.
Yeah. But I can just transfer quickly. Price is something that you can use as a Poreto
criteria. But the big problem is that there is so much dynamic fares that exist today
that it's impossible to use it because there would be.